Defeating Ebola: A Contagion and Forecasting Virus in Affected Countries
In December 2013, the first case, or index patient, was disclosed. Bats are thought to have infected an 18-month-old boy from a small community in Guinea. On January 24, 2014, the district health officials were issued an official medical alert after five more cases of deadly diarrhea were reported in the area. The Ebola virus quickly moved to Guinea's capital, Conakry, and the Guinean Ministry of Health issued an alert for an unidentified sickness on March 13, 2014. The Pasteur Institute in France verified the sickness as EVD caused by the Zaire ebolavirus shortly after. The WHO announced an EVD outbreak on March 23, 2014, with 49 confirmed cases and 29 deaths. The outbreak was difficult to suppress due to a lack of surveillance systems and public health infrastructure, and it swiftly expanded to Guinea's neighboring countries, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The outbreak has spread to the capitals of all three countries by July 2014. This was the first time EVD had spread from relatively isolated rural areas into densely populated metropolitan areas, allowing for extraordinary transmission opportunities. The deteriorating situation in West Africa was labeled a Public Health Emergency of Worldwide Concern (PHEIC) on August 8, 2014, which is reserved for incidents that pose a risk of international spread or necessitate a coordinated international response. EVD spread to seven other countries throughout the epidemic: Italy, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Later secondary infections occurred in Italy, Mali, Nigeria, and the United States, mostly in healthcare settings. The unprecedented circulation of EVD into crowded urban areas, increased mobilization across borders, and conflicts between key infection control practices and prevailing cultural and traditional practices in West Africa are all factors contributing to the outbreak's scope, both in terms of cases and geography. Local leaders were involved in prevention initiatives and communications, as well as meticulous policy execution at the national and global levels, which helped to control the virus's spread and put a stop to the outbreak.
